
This document should be a comprehensive guide for all users who wish to
use the REMO model for scientific purposes. It also gives an
introduction to the preprocessing and postprocessing workflow that is
neccessary to successfully prepare for and analyze data of a downscaling
experiment with the REMO model. This user guide is *not* meant to be a
scientific documentation but rather a technical one and we try to
describe the framework and functionalities of the model so that the user
can make basic adjustments to the code itself. However, for a basic
understanding of the functionalities and capabilities of the model, we
give a brief theoretical introduction in Chapter [cha:introduction] so
that the user gets an overview of what experiments might be possible
with the model. Additionally, the user is also invited to have a look at
the code documentation that is given in the model source code itself.
Although we try to stay as generic as possible concerning the machine
where the model is run, we often describe some details about how to run
REMO at the DKRZ on the MISTRAL Intel machine in Hamburg in the GERICS
framework since a lot experiments are run there. However, all scripts
and codes are, in principle, generic so that is should be possible to
run the REMO model and all tools concerning pre and postprocessing on
any HPC framwork.

.. |image| image:: ./fig/REMO_logo.png
   :width: 5.00000cm
.. |image| image:: ./fig/Logo_GERICS_final.eps
   :width: 5.00000cm
